[#13894] [Docs] Add docs page for concurrency control + miscellaneous related changes (#14839)
yugabyte/yugabyte-db: docs/content/preview/architecture/transactions/transaction-priorities.md

---
title: Transaction priorities
headerTitle: Transaction priorities
linkTitle: Transaction priorities
description: Details about Transaction priorities in YSQL
menu:
  preview:
    identifier: architecture-transaction-priorities
    parent: architecture-acid-transactions
    weight: 1153
type: docs
---

<ul class="nav nav-tabs-alt nav-tabs-yb">

  <li >
    <a href="../transaction-priorities/" class="nav-link active">
      <i class="icon-postgres" aria-hidden="true"></i>
      YSQL
    </a>
  </li>

</ul>

> When using the [Fail-on-Conflict](../concurrency-control/#fail-on-conflict) concurrency control policy, transactions are assigned priorities that help decide which transactions should be aborted on conflicts.

Reviewer: "which transactions should be aborted on conflicts."
->
"which transactions should be aborted in case of conflict."

For distributed transactions, the priority space is `unit64_t`. The 64 bit range is split into 2 priority buckets -

1. Normal priority bucket: `[yb::kRegularTxnLowerBound, yb::kRegularTxnUpperBound]` i.e., 0 to  `uint32_t_max`-1

> 2. High priority bucket: `[yb::kHighPriTxnLowerBound, yb::kHighPriTxnUpperBound]` i.e., `uint32_t_max` to `uint64_t_max`

Reviewer: nit -- i think we should hyphenate these here and elsewhere, e.g.
"Normal-priority bucket"
"High-priority bucket"

> All transactions are usually randomly assigned a priority in the first bucket (normal). However, in case a transaction has the first query which takes a `FOR UPDATE/ FOR SHARE/ FOR NO KEY UPDATE` explicit row lock using SELECT, it is randomly assigned a priority from the high priority bucket.

Reviewer: "However, in case a transaction has the first query which takes a"
->
"However, in case the first statement in a transaction takes a"

Reviewer: "it is randomly assigned a priority from the high priority bucket."
->
"it will be assigned a priority from the high-priority bucket."

is it worth clarifying how this interacts with other controls described elsewhere e.g. lower/upper bound session variables

Author: yes, that is described below the examples starting after `Also note that the same floating point bounds apply to both buckets.`. Let me know if that is what you meant

> Apart from the above rule, there are two other user configurable session variables that can help control the priority assigned to transaction is a specific session. These are `yb_transaction_priority_lower_bound` and `yb_transaction_priority_upper_bound`. These help set lower and upper bounds on the randomly assigned priority a transaction should receive from the respective bucket that applies to it. For ease of use, the bounds are expressed as a float such that the numerical ranges of a bucket are proportionally map to floats from 0-1. Also note that the same floating point bounds apply to both buckets.

Reviewer: "the bounds are expressed as a float such that the numerical ranges of a bucket are proportionally map to floats from 0-1"
->
"the bounds are expressed as a float in [0, 1] specifying which range of the applicable bucket we should use to assign priority"

Author: done with `... assign priorities` instead of `... assign priority`

For example, if `yb_transaction_priority_lower_bound=0.5` and `yb_transaction_priority_upper_bound=0.75`:

1. a transaction that is assigned a priority from the normal bucket will get one between the 0.5-0.75 marks such that the `[yb::kRegularTxnLowerBound, yb::kRegularTxnUpperBound]` range proportionally maps to 0-1.

> 2. a transaction that is assigned a priority from the high priority bucket will get between the 0.5-0.75 marks such that the `[yb::kHighPriTxnLowerBound, yb::kHighPriTxnUpperBound]` range proportionally maps to 0-1.

Reviewer: these examples should probably be more explicit, e.g. specify what the actual ranges are which we would end up selecting from in each case, in the uint64 space, if the goal is to add clarity

{{< note title="All single shard transactions have a priority of kHighPriTxnLowerBound-1" >}}
{{</note >}}

The `yb_get_current_transaction_priority` function can be used to fetch the transaction prriority of the current active transaction. It returns of a pair of two values -

1. A float between 0-1 inclusive with 9 decimal units of precision that such that it proportionally maps to the priority assigned in the range of the priority bucket the transaction belongs in.

> 2. The bucket in which the transaction's priority lies - `Normal` or `High` priority.

Reviewer: this is starting to get confusing. we should be consistent about how we talk about priorities. above we talk about their representation as uint64's, but the interface we provide seems to be in float space

my suggestion would be to stick to talking about the float representation and not even mention the uint64 representation, except in one footnote after all other descriptions of or building on the numerical priority concept are done, where we say e.g. "Note that internally priorities are represented as uint64s, with the normal-priority bucket mapping to {range} and the high-priority bucket mapping to {range}"

Author: nice suggestion, better to stick to float and add a note that this maps to the uint64 range internally. Applied changes

type: docs
---

<ul class="nav nav-tabs-alt nav-tabs-yb">

  <li >
    <a href="../transaction-priorities/" class="nav-link active">
      <i class="icon-postgres" aria-hidden="true"></i>
      YSQL
    </a>
  </li>

</ul>

When using the [Fail-on-Conflict](../concurrency-control/#fail-on-conflict) concurrency control policy, transactions are assigned priorities that help decide which transactions should be aborted in case of conflict.

There are two priority buckets, each having a priority range of [reals](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/datatype.html) in [0, 1] as follows:

1. `High-priority` bucket: if the first statement in a transaction takes a `FOR UPDATE/ FOR SHARE/ FOR NO KEY UPDATE` explicit row lock using SELECT, it will be assigned a priority from this bucket.

2. `Normal-priority` bucket: all other transactions are assigned a priority from this bucket.

Note that a transaction with any priority P1 from the high-priority bucket can abort a transaction with any priority P2 from the normal-priority bucket. For example, a transaction with priority 0.1 from the high-priority bucket can abort a transaction with priority 0.9 from the normal-priority bucket.

> Priorities are randomly chosen from the applicable bucket. However, there are two user configurable session variables that can help control the priority assigned to transaction is a specific session: `yb_transaction_priority_lower_bound` and `yb_transaction_priority_upper_bound`. These variables help set lower and upper bounds on the randomly assigned priority that a transaction should receive from the applicable bucket. These variables accept a value of `real` datatype in the range [0, 1]. Also note that the same bounds apply to both buckets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Priorities are randomly chosen from the applicable bucket. However, there are two user configurable session variables that can help control the priority assigned to transaction in a specific session: `yb_transaction_priority_lower_bound` and `yb_transaction_priority_upper_bound`. These variables help set lower and upper bounds on the randomly assigned priority that a transaction should receive from the applicable bucket. These variables accept a value of `real` datatype in the range [0, 1]. Also note that the same bounds apply to both buckets.
```

Author: done

{{< note title="All single shard transactions have a priority of 1 in the normal-priority bucket." >}}
{{</note >}}

The `yb_get_current_transaction_priority` function can be used to fetch the transaction priority of the current active transaction. It outputs a pair `<priority> (bucket)`, where `<priority>` is of a real datatype between [0, 1] with 9 decimal units of precision, and `<bucket>` is either `Normal` or `High`.

{{< note title="Note">}}

> As an exception, if a transaction is assigned the highest priority possible, that is, a priority of 1 in the high-priority bucket, then a single value _highest priority transaction_ is returned without any real value.

Reviewer: this is a weird exception -- why?

also can we share exactly what the output would look like in this case?

Reviewer: e.g.
```suggestion
As an exception, if a transaction is assigned the highest priority possible, that is, a priority of 1 in the high-priority bucket, then we simply return `highest priority transaction` without any real value.
```

Author: done

also agreed that this is a weird exception, will raise a gh issue to change this in code

{{</note >}}

> A transaction's priority is `0.000000000 (normal-priority transaction)` until a transaction is really started.

Reviewer: what does "really started" mean?

Author: a distributed transaction

Author: we don't start a transaction until a write is performed
